Wheeler & Schaffner 2013 Improved understanding of weed biological control safety and impact with chemical ecology: a reveiw

Biological control- chemical hypotheses include EICA, novel weapons (Callaway & Ridenour 2004) and novel chemistry (Cappuccino & Arnason 2006)

Secondary plant compounds are produced by plants to defend themseleves against general herbivory, but also act as cues to specialized insects.

Chemistry of host plant spcificity

Fundamental host range is the range of plants on which specialist herbivores can complete their development(Schaffner 2001). Assumed that taxonomy corresponds to phenotypic traits, e.g. secondary plant chemicals. This is largely true at the tribe or family level (Futuyma 2000).

At lower taxonomic levels, there is no consistent pattern (Pelser et al. 2005).

if herbivores can distinguish simliar metabolites from one another, then specific chemical profile is more important than phylogeny (Becerra &Venable 1999). Different profiles of similar metabolites may affect herbivore selection and performance (Muller et al. 2010).

Herbivores may not select a plant that contains attractive compounds because they are insensitive to variations in chemical profiles or because an otherwise attractive plant also contains feeding deterrents. For example Plutella xylostella does not attack Barbarea vulgaris, which has attractive glucosinolates, bu also triterpene (Shinoda et al. 2002)

Wapshere (1974) model

Tansy ragwort Jaobeae vulgaris system 

Ragworts contain PAs but also chlorogenic acid, flavonoids, and benzoquinoids

"PA distribution in ragweeds appears to be largely incidental within the whole clade, indicating that diffrences in PA profiles in Senecio sensu lato cannot be explained by the gain and loss of PA-specific genes" (Pelser et al. 2005)

Non-PA chemicals are distributed throughout the plant kingdom (Kirk et al. 2005).

T. jacobaeae larvae are sensitive to PAs, more to Seneciphylline N-oxide and senecionine N-oxide but adult cinnabar moths cannot distinguish between closely related PAs during host plant selection.

Feeding of adult L. jacobaeae and L. flavicornis were not correlated with PA profiles (Kirk et al. 2002)

Melaleuca quinquenervia (myrtaceae) and relatives express defensive terpinoids, but the Melaleuca BCA Oxyops vitiosa also delvlops on the unrelated Morella cerifera (Myricaceae). Oviposition of Oecophoridae moth, Agonopterix alstromeriana, that specializes on posion hemlock,Conium maculatum (Apiaceae) is not related to concnetrations of piperidine alkaloid defenses of this genus. Instead it is positively correlated withconiine and negatively correlated with the monoterpene Z-ocimene.

These examples highlight the shorcomings of a strictly  Wapshereian approach based soley on secondary plant compounds. Pohnert 2010 and Summer et al. 2003 suggest a combination of screening primary and secondary plant compounds in addition to host range testing.

Evolutionary changes in plant chemistry and effects on biological control

EICA coined by Blossey & Notzold (1995) in the purple loosestrife system

Shifting defense hypothesis SDH (Doorduin and Vrieling 2011) posits that invading plants will experience pressure from novel generalists and should be expected to increase (metabolically) cheap defenses toxic to generalists but dial back expensive digestibility-reducing compounds.

What is the tradeoff between plant tolerance of herbiovry and resistance in the form of defensive compounds (Muller-Scharer et al. 2004)

Invasive populations of tansy ragwort had less damage from and lower survival by a generalist herbivore, a noctuid moth Mammestra brassicae. The biocontrol agent T. jacobaeae ahd higher survial and heavier larvae and pupae on invasive rather than native plants (Joshi and Vrieling 2005). See also Stastny et al 2005.

Invasive chinese tallow had lower tannin content and faster growth rate than in its native range. In addition the invasive plants had higher tolerance of herbivory, suggesting that even high insect biontrol populations might not provide adequate control. 

Overall mixed support for EICA in studies of M. quinquenervia, spotted knapweed C. stoebe, and purple loosestrife L. salicaria. Also mixed support for SDH.

Constraints on post invasion evolution could include lack of genetic variation in introduced population, low selection pressure, low costs of defense, contraits due to pleiotrophic effects (a mutation in a gene that affects more than one phenotypic trait).

Plants that have been successfully controlled with BC have supported the SDH hypothesis.

Traits of populations under BC pressure in the invaded range should evolve to look more like native populations than their (previous) pre-biocontrol phenotypes. C. maculatum increased expression of alkaloids when reunited with its herbivore A. alstroeneriana. On the other hand J. vulgaris populations with exposure to their native herbivore L. jacobaeae, indicating BC provoked greater herbivory tolerance and reduced resistance. >> This sound like the M. quinquenervia paper by Tipping et al. > Resouce regulation hypothesis

**What phenotypic traits are present now in BP, prior to the release of agents?** another thing to keep track of 

Increase variability in induced defenses may arise when an invasive plant is reunited with its herbivores, as the reduced expression of these defenses would release plants from stabilizing selection (= selection that tends to favor the middle values of a phenotype and disfavors extremes).

Herbivore induction of secondary plant chemistry and its effect on biological control

**Generalist mites provoked a greater terpenoid response than did the host-specific gall formers** this seems important

Generalist leps did worse on tallow leaves that had first been fed on by the tallow specialists Gadirtha inexacta

Intraspecific variability in secondary plant chemistry of weeds

Sequestration of defensive chemistry




















































